Next up we have two more array methods that have to do with removing and adding elements but rather
than adding to the end or removing from the end like push and pop shift and on shift work with the beginning
or the start of the array.
So they do the same thing.
The location is different now two quick notes.
First the naming shift and on shift will probably trip you up at some point if you're brand new.
I still occasionally confuse them and second the origin of the name has to do with other languages and
other data structures that pre-date javascript shift and on shift have kind of become standard across
programming languages even if they don't seem like they make a ton of sense.
If you want to learn more you can research stacks and Qs and you can find the origin of push pop shift
and unsure if and where those names come from.
So let's start by taking a look at on shift on the docks.
You can see it works very similarly to push except it adds to the beginning.
And just like push it returns the new length of the array.
So let's say that I'm doing the dishes I've been recording and procrastinating and there's a big pile
of dishes and I'm taking them over to the sink and I'm going to stack them up.
So the first thing I'll put down let's make an array called dishes to do and I'll start with big platter
that goes on the bottom.
I put that down first on my counter and then I end up with a bowl next or how about a big plate.
So dishes to do dad on shift that will add to the beginning and we'll go with large plate and then I'll
add in another one which is small plates.
Notice I am getting the return value which is the new length of dishes to do.
And you can see that everything has been added to the beginning so we started with big platter.
Then I added the large plate on top and then the small plate on top and then let's say the last thing
I'll shift or on shift in is a cup or maybe a cereal bowl.
I'm definitely not drawing from real life experience I promise.
And then a mug and then inside the mug I put a dirty Spoon.
Okay so now we can see dishes to do has a length of six that was returned and it does indeed have six
items.
The order is important we added to the start each time.
So now let's take a look at shift which removes the first element from an array and it returns that
removed element so I'm going to clear my console so I have a little more space and let's say I'm ready
to do the dishes.
I have the sink on I've got the soap out.
The first thing I'm going to do is take that top item.
So dishes to do that shift and I get dirty spoon.
That's what I need to do next.
And if we look at dishes to do it is now shorter has a length of five dirty spoon is no longer at the
beginning.
Let's call shift again and we get mug and then cereal bowl.
Small plates will look at dishes to do now only contains two items.
There we go.
And that's pretty much it.
To shift and on shift they're pretty straightforward.
If you ignore their confusing names just add and remove to the beginning versus pushing pop which add
and remove to the end.
Now one quick note about on shift is that you can add in multiple things at once.
If I do this on shift and then I pass in multiple values so let's go with fork and knife what do you
think.
Dishes to do.
Looks like you can see that it added them in this order that I have here.
It put them in as a chunk together which is actually different than if I had on shifted them individually.
So I'll do it again but this time we'll do it with spoon so we'll do a small spoon and a large spoon
so I'll do small spoon and then large spoon and we look at dishes to do the first item went in first
but then the second item went in front of it.
So all I want to show you is that um shifting items one at a time is actually different than on shifting
multiple at once because the order is preserved.
This entire chunk is just added in versus if we're adding to the beginning and then adding to the beginning
again.
You know we keep adding to the start that order is in reverse.
So yeah that's pretty much it.
You can unzip multiple items.
I didn't really show this with push but you can do this as well.
We can push one thing in we'll just push a platter to the end which kind of breaks my hold dishes idea
here metaphor or whatever because I would be adding a platter underneath my stack of stuff.
So a lot of work.
But if we look at dishes to do there we are now if we add in multiple things with push we'll add in.
How about a cutting board and a cookie sheet like that.
We look at dishes to do.
They both were added in the order remains the same.
And this would work the same if I was pushing them one at a time because we're adding to the end.
So if I push cutting board and then I push cookie sheet it doesn't matter if I push them at once or
individually but with unsure if it does matter.
So that's it.
There are four different really common methods you'll see.
I would say out of the two push and pop are most commonly used but shift in on shift still come up quite
a bit as we learn more and start building things you'll see when they come into play I promise they're
useful.
Now we're going to take a look at some of the other useful Ray methods that don't necessarily have to
do with inserting the beginning or removing from the beginning slash and.